The difference between a bad programmer and a good programmer is understanding. That is, bad programmers don’t understand what they are doing, and good programmers do. Believe it or not, it really is that simple. This book exists to help all programmers understand software development on a very broad level that can be applied to any programming language or project from here to eternity. It lays out scientific laws for software development, in a simple form that anybody can read. If you are a programmer, these laws will help explain why certain software development methods work and why some don’t. They will help guide you in making software development decisions on a day-to-day basis, and they will help your team have intelligent conversations that lead to sensible plans. If you aren’t a programmer but you work in the software industry, you may find this book useful for several reasons: • It is an excellent educational tool to use in the training of junior programmers, while still containing information that is highly relevant to senior programmers. • It will allow you to more effectively understand why software engineers want to do certain things, or why software should be developed in a certain way. • It can help you communicate your ideas effectively to software engineers, by helping you understand the fundamental principles on which good software engineers base their decisions. Ideally, everybody who works in the software industry should be able to read and understand this book, even if they don’t have a lot of programming experience, or even if English is not their native language. Having more technical understanding will help in grasping some of the concepts, but most require no programming experience whatsoever to understand. In fact, even though this book is about software development, it contains almost no program code. How can that be? Well, the idea is that these principles should apply to any software project, in any programming language. You shouldn’t have to know some specific programming language just to understand things that apply to all v www.it-ebooks.info programming, everywhere. Instead, real-world examples and analogies are used throughout the book to help you get a better understanding of each principle, as it is presented. Most of all, this book was written to help you, and to help bring sanity, order, and simplicity into the field of software development. I hope that you enjoy reading it and that it improves your life and your software in some way. Conventions Used in This Book The following typographical conventions are used in this book: Italic Indicates new terms, URLs, email addresses, filenames, and file extensions. Constant width Used for program listings, as well as within paragraphs to refer to program elements such as variable or function names. This icon signifies a tip, suggestion, or general note. This icon indicates a warning or caution. Attribution and Permissions This book is here to help you get your job done. If you reference limited parts of it in your work or writings, we appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually indicates the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example: “Code Simplicity: The Science of Software Development by Max Kanat-Alexander (O’Reilly). Copyright 2012 Max Kanat-Alexander, 978-1-4493-1389-0.” If you feel your use of examples or quotations from this book falls outside fair use or the permission given above, feel free to contact us at permissions@oreilly.com. Safari® Books Online Safari Books Online (http://my.safaribooksonline.com) is an on-demand digital library that delivers expert content in both book and video form from the world’s leading authors in technology and business. Technology professionals, software developers, web designers, and business and vi | Preface www.it-ebooks.info creative professionals use Safari Books Online as their primary resource for research, problem solving, learning, and certification training. Safari Books Online offers a range of product mixes and pricing programs for organizations, government agencies, and individuals. Subscribers have access to thousands of books, training videos, and prepublication manuscripts in one fully searchable database from publishers like O’Reilly Media, Prentice Hall Professional, Addison-Wesley Professional, Microsoft Press, Sams, Que, Peachpit Press, Focal Press, Cisco Press, John Wiley & Sons, Syngress, Morgan Kaufmann, IBM Redbooks, Packt, Adobe Press, FT Press, Apress, Manning, New Riders, McGraw-Hill, Jones & Bartlett, Course Technology, and dozens more. For more information about Safari Books Online, please visit us online.